# Exploratory Data Analysis of Individual Solver 1 Performance on the New York Times Crossword Puzzle
 
 ## Introduction

### Overview
This summary reports on exploratory data analysis (EDA) of 3+ years (late 2020- early 2024) of my own performance on the [New York Times (NYT) crossword puzzle] (https://www.nytimes.com/crosswords). Included are visual and statistical descriptions of trends in my solve times across this period, my performance relative to the 'Global Median Solver' (GMS; see next section), and the relationship between my performance and a number of variables. These variables included properties of the puzzle grids (e.g., number of answers, number of black squares), properties of clues and answers (e.g., prevalence of wordplay in clues, aggregate rarity of answers in a puzzle), environment (e.g., time of day a puzzle was completed), constructor identity, and my own past performance prior to a given solve. This EDA led to identification of a set of features correlated to my performance thus far that hold promise as useful inputs to a predictive model of my future performance.

This project would not have been possible without access to two key data sources. The first, [XWord Info: New York Times Crossword Answers and Insights](https://www.xwordinfo.com/), was my source for data on the puzzles themselves. This included a number of proprietary metrics pertaining to the grids, answers, clues and constructors. XWord Info has a contract with NYT for access to the raw data underlying these metrics, but I unfortunately do not. Therefore, I will not be able to share raw or processed data that I've acquired from their site (though [Jupyter notebooks](https://jupyter.org/) with all of my Python code for analysis and figure generation can be found [here](https://github.com/ursus-maritimus-714/NYT-XWord-EDA-Global-Median-Solver/tree/main/notebooks)). The second, [XWStats](xwstats.com), was my source for historical solve time data. This includes both my own data and data for the GMS. 

### Global Median Solver (GMS)

Several analyses in ths summary compare my (IS1) solve performance to that of the GMS over the complete set of puzzle that I have completed. An extensive summary of my analysis of GMS performance over a 6+ year timeframe (2018-2024) can be found [here](https://github.com/ursus-maritimus-714/NYT-XWord-EDA-Global-Median-Solver#). XWStats (Matt) determines the global median solve time (GMST) for every individual puzzle from a pool of ~1-2K individual solvers of a given puzzle for whom he has (with their consent) acquired their data from NYT. Though Matt from XWStats uses the word "global", and I adopt it as well, it is highly likely that the sample from which the GMST is pulled per-puzzle skews faster than the true population sample. The probable main reasons for this are that the sample does not contain solvers who fail to complete a given puzzle (a % that likely increases through the week's puzzle days), and that the sample contains only solvers motivated enough by the prospect of improvement to track their own progress. One additional thing to bear in mind regarding GMS performance is that, because I do not have the underlying raw solver data, I simply made the assumption that the GMS (likely a different individual solver on most puzzles) solved them in approximately the order in which they were released. In contrast, because I do have completion timestamps for my own solves, analyses and visuals of my own performance over time were processed with respect to that as opposed to with respect to issue date. 

